---
author: Josh Tolley
title: Regionation with PostGIS
tags: postgres, gis, liquid-galaxy
gh_issue_number: 1378
---

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/reefs-far-banner.jpg" alt="Coral reefs map" /><br />

Recently a co-worker handed me a KML file and said, in essence, “This file
takes too long for the Liquid Galaxy to load and render. What can you do to
make it faster?” It’s a common problem for large data sets, no matter the
display platform. For the Liquid Galaxy the common first response is
“Regionate!”

Though your dictionary may claim otherwise, for purposes of this
post the word means to group a set of geographic data into regions of localized
objects. This is sometimes also called “spatial clustering” or “geographic
clustering”. After grouping objects into geographically similar clusters, we
can then use the KML [Region
object](https://developers.google.com/kml/documentation/kmlreference) to tell
Google Earth to render the full detail of a region only when the current view
shows enough of that region to justify spending the processing time. Although
the “Pro” version of Google Earth offers an automated regionation feature, it
has some limitations. I’d like to compare it to some alternatives available in
PostgreSQL and PostGIS.

### Data sets

For this experiment I’ve chosen a few different freely available datasets, with
the aim to use different geographic data types, distributed in different
ways. First, I found a [database of 49,000 on-shore wind
turbines](https://www.sciencebase.gov/catalog/item/55c4aa9be4b033ef52106e2f)
across the United States. The data set represents each turbine with a single
point, and annotates it with its type, manufacturer, capacity, and many other
characteristics. In this sample image, notice how the data are distributed,
with compact clusters of many points, scattered sparsely across the landscape.

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/windfarms-dataset.jpg" alt="Wind turbine dataset" /><br />

I wanted data sets with different types of geometric objects, so the [second
data set](https://earthquake.usgs.gov/hazards/qfaults/) I chose describes
geologic fault lines within the United States as multiple strings of connected
line segments, comprising what’s known as a multilinestring object (see [the
OpenGIS Consortium Simple Features for SQL
specification](http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=829) for
more details on multilinestring data and other GIS data types in this
document). Like the wind turbine data, this dataset also annotates each fault
with other attributes, though we won’t use those annotations here. The faults
are distributed in less obvious clusters than the wind turbines, though some
clustering is still easily visible.

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/faults-dataset.jpg" alt="Faults dataset" /><br />

The [last data
set](https://www.sciencebase.gov/catalog/item/59667039e4b0d1f9f05cf2ff) uses a
third geographic type, the multipolygon, to represent the perimeter of
wildfires in a portion of the western United States. The data set combines
wildfire data from a variety of freely available sources, and though it may not
be comprehensive, it serves nicely to experiment with regionating polygon data.
Note that across the area covered by the dataset, the polygons are quite
thickly distributed.

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/wildfire-dataset.jpg" alt="Wildfire dataset" /><br />

### Regionating with Google Earth Pro

Having decided which data sets to use, my first step was to download each one,
and import them into three different tables in a PostGIS database. The precise
details are beyond the scope of this article, but for those interested in
playing along at home, I recommend trying [qgis](https://www.qgis.org/en/site/).
For data processing and storage, I used PostgreSQL 10 and PostGIS 2.4. Since my
goal is to compare these data with Google Earth Pro’s built-in regionation
tools, for the next step I created KML files from my PostGIS data with a
simple Python script, and used Google Earth Pro to regionate each data set.
Here I ran into a few surprises, first that Google Earth Pro doesn’t actually
display anything but menus on my Ubuntu 16.04 system. The computer I’m using is
a little unusual, so I’m willing to chalk this up to some peculiarity of the
computer, and I won’t hold this one against Google Earth Pro. It certainly made
testing a little difficult, as I had to use my Google Earth Pro installation
for regionating, and either my Google Earth (note: not “Pro”) installation, or
qgis, to view the results.

The second surprise was the sheer time it took to regionate these data. The
wildfire and turbine data only took a couple of minutes, but my computer spent
more than half an hour to regionate the faults data. My system isn’t especially
high powered, but this still caught me off guard, and as we’ll see, the other
regionation methods I tried took far less time than Google Earth Pro for this
data set.

Finally, Google Earth Pro’s regionation system offers no customization at all;
the user simply enters a KML file to regionate and a directory for the results.
The PostGIS-based options, as we’ll see below, have parameters which affect the
size and number of resulting clusters, but with Google Earth Pro, you’re stuck
with whatever it gives you. For each of the three data sets, Google Earth Pro
gave me thousands of KML files as output -- just over 2000 files for the
wildfire data, and over 17,000 for the faults data. Each file contains all the
placemarks for one of the regions the system found. In any regionation problem
I’ve had, the end goal was always to create a single, final KML file in the
end, so in practice I’d likely have to reprocess each of these files (or
rather, I’d write code to do it), but this isn’t much different from the other
methods we’ll explore, which create tens, hundreds, or even thousands of
database entries and which likewise need to be processed in software.

### Basic regionating with PostGIS

PostGIS offers several functions to help us cluster geographic data. The
two I used for this test were
[ST_ClusterKMeans](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_ClusterKMeans.html) and
[ST_ClusterDBScan](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_ClusterDBSCAN.html). Both are
window functions which calculate clusters and return a unique integer ID for
each input row. So after making sure the table for each of my three data sets
contained a primary key called “id”, a geometry field called “location”, and an
empty integer field called “cluster_id”, I could cluster a dataset with one
query, such as this one for the turbine data:

```sql
UPDATE turbines
    SET cluster_id = cid
    FROM (
        SELECT
            id,
            ST_ClusterDBScan(location, 0.5, 3)
                OVER () AS cid
        FROM turbines
    ) foo
    WHERE foo.id = turbines.id;
```

The two functions I mentioned above have advantages and disadvantages for
different situations, and I knew I’d want to experiment with them and their
arguments, so I wrote another Python script to digest the clustering results
and turn them into KML, to make it easy to compare different values and see
which I liked best. When zoomed out, each KML files display an approximate
outline of the group of objects in one region, and as the user zooms in, the
objects themselves appear. For instance, in this screenshot from the wind
turbine data set, you can see several regions outlined in white, and the
individual turbines from one region appearing at the top of the image.

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/regionated-turbines-example.jpg" alt="Regionated wind turbines" /><br />

KML cognoscenti may note that regions defined in KML are always rectangular,
but the shapes in the image above are not. In fact, the image shows “concave
hulls” drawn around the objects in the region, the result of the PostGIS
[ST_ConcaveHull function](https://postgis.net/docs/ST_ConcaveHull.html). I
outlined the regions with these hulls rather than with rectangles, to get a
better idea of where the objects each cluster actually lay within the
rectangular region. This was also helpful for another data set I was working
on at the time, not described in this article.

To create these regions and the corresponding hulls, I need to know each
region’s bounding box in latitude and longitude coordinates, and the hull to
draw. The script gets that information like this:

```sql
WITH clusters AS (
    SELECT
        cluster_id,
        ST_Collect(location) AS locations
    FROM turbines
    GROUP BY cluster_id
)
SELECT
    ST_XMin(locations) AS xmin,
    ST_XMax(locations) AS xmax,
    ST_YMin(locations) AS ymin,
    ST_YMax(locations) AS ymax,
    ST_AsKML(ST_ConcaveHull(locations, 0.99)) AS envelope
FROM clusters;
```

### PostGIS regionation functions

The two functions I mentioned deserve some further exploration. First
[ST_ClusterKMeans](http://postgis.net/docs/manual-dev/ST_ClusterKMeans.html),
which as you’d expect from the name, group objects using a [k-means
cluster](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K-means_clustering) algorithm. Its only
parameters are the geometric data objects themselves, and the maximum number of
clusters the user wants it to find. The algorithm will make the clusters as
small as they need to be, in order to come up with the number the user
requests, though of course it won’t generate more clusters than there are input
data points.

The other function I used is called
[ST_ClusterDBScan](http://postgis.net/docs/manual-dev/ST_ClusterDBSCAN.html), an
implementation of the [DBSCAN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DBSCAN) algorithm.
This algorithm accepts two parameters, a distance called `eps`, and a number of
points called `minpoints`. A discussion of their meaning is out of the scope of
this article; suffice it to say that modifying these values will adjust the
size and number of resulting clusters.

Which function works best for a given situation, and with which parameters,
depends largely on the specific needs of the end user, as well as the type and
distribution of the input data. For example, compare these two results, which
regionate the faults data set using first DBSCAN, then K-means.

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/faults-dbscan-example.jpg" alt="Faults data, DBSCAN clustering" /><br />

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/faults-kmeans-example.jpg" alt="Faults data, K-means clustering" /><br />

Aside from the obvious advantages of customizability, the PostGIS regionation
is <i>much</i> faster than Google Earth Pro’s regionater. The DBSCAN clustering
shown above took a bit over two minutes, and the K-means clustering was done in
just six seconds. Of course this timing varies with different parameters, and
it wasn’t terribly difficult to find a DBSCAN algorithm invocation that would
take over ten minutes on the faults data. But that’s still an improvement over
Google Earth Pro’s half hour run times.

Here’s another example, taken from the wind turbine data, again with the DBSCAN
results first, followed by K-means.

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/turbines-dbscan-0.75-25.jpg" alt="Wind turbine data, DBSCAN clustering" /><br />

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/turbines-kmeans-20.jpg" alt="Wind turbine data, K-means clustering" /><br />

### Applications

Obviously, beauty is in the eye of the beholder, and applications could be
found for which both clustering systems were beneficial. I’ll finish with one
more example from a data set I haven’t yet talked about. It comes from
[NOAA](https://coast.noaa.gov/psc/sea/content/coral-reefs-risk-present-2050.html)
and shows coral reefs determined to be under threat from various risks, as well
as the predicted development of that risk level through the year 2050. For
these data, I envisioned regionating them so that when zoomed out, the user
would see the general boundaries of a cluster, colored in a way that reflected
the level of assessed risk. Zooming in, the user would see the large clusters
fade into smaller ones, which in turn would fade into the full detail. This is
where I began using the “concave hulls” mentioned earlier. KML Regions let us
specify fades, so that one level of detail fades out as another fades in, and I
used this along with two levels of clustering to create the data set shown in
screen captures here. First, from a high altitude, the user sees the largest,
least-detailed clusters, with colors representing the assessed threat.

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/reefs-far.jpg" alt="Coral reefs, widest zoom" /><br />

Zooming in, the larger clusters fade into smaller ones. Here you can see some
of the most detailed layers already beginning to emerge. In the top right, you
can also see one of the original clusters fading out.

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/reefs-mid.jpg" alt="Coral reefs, mid-range zoom" /><br />

Finally, at even closer zoom levels, we see mostly the original reef data.

<img src="/blog/2018/02/08/regionating-with-postgis/reefs-close.jpg" alt="Coral reefs, closest zoom" /><br />

I find this presentation both visually beautiful, and technically interesting.
Please comment on the uses you can envision for this sort of processing.
